Land ownership was rather in the gift of the local lord and people were there by
individuals, lower orders of society as well, I might crudely put it, didn't own land, so it
would be the local marcher lord in this case, we're part of the marcher lordship of Mytheannis,
which was sometimes dominated, should be dominated by the Mortimer's, more often than not they were
the marcher family who came at the time of William the Conqueror, but there were local Welsh lords,
those warlords really, the Welsh called themselves princes who dominated the land
and therefore felt they had the land in their gift and so we had the
the mark when giving land and Roger Mortimer gave land, but they gave the tenants with it as well,
so the tenants really had no choice in that, so they transferred with it and so built up quite a large
acreage really, looking at the home range of
of Gotlands I would call it, Golden as some of my colleagues call it,
which basically extended from farms like Esgerwy, from Camden further down the valley,
and Pesigui, towards Herffenduy, northwards, somewhat north of Llandad and Donneth,
and if you go to U-Town you guide onto the main road if you come through the Esgedonpyrn
bridge and you're still on Abbey land at that point and it extended a bit north of there,
if you go over to Glennoadloys you leave Abbey land when you get to Tullough, so
quite a big range, probably functioned almost as a series of sub-granges,
so all those farms would have been given all that land by one of the marcher lords and for
example if we were a Welsh lord or the Mortimer in this case, people say we're
governors of this part of the Welsh marchers.